Lowering Deposit Requirements on Polkadot and Kusama Asset Hub (#45)
polkadot-fellows/RFCs: text/000x-assethub.md

> # RFC-0000: Lowering Deposit Requirements on Polkadot Asset Hub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# RFC-0000: Lowering NFT Deposits on Polkadot and Kusama Asset Hubs
```
better?

|                 |                                                                                                    |
| --------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Start Date**  | 2 November 2023                                                                                    |

> | **Description** | A proposal to reduce the minimum deposit required for collection creation on the Polkadot Asset Hub, making it more accessible and affordable for artists. |

Reviewer: Kusama should be mentioned as well.

> | **Authors**     | [Aurora Poppyseed](https://github.com/poppyseedDev), [Just_Luuuu](https://github.com/justLuuuu)    |

Reviewer: Further down you mention `KodaDot` a few times. I think it should be mentioned here as well - if it is part of a business effort.

Author: This initiative stemed from an independent effort, seeing how frustrated Luuu was with converting artists to Asset Hub, however I additionally added VikiiVal as a contributor since he is helping in gathering the requested data.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in https://github.com/poppyseedDev/RFCs/commit/0e49a4fd5dc3cbe4d4e326a6ede38c91f000da10

## Summary

This RFC proposes a change to the current deposit requirements on the Polkadot and Kusama Asset Hub for creating NFT collections. The objective is to lower the barrier to entry for artists, fostering a more inclusive and vibrant ecosystem, while maintaining network integrity and preventing spam.

## Motivation

The current deposit of 10 DOT for collection creation on the Polkadot Asset Hub presents a significant financial barrier for many artists. By lowering the deposit requirements, we aim to encourage more artists to participate in the Polkadot NFT ecosystem, thereby enriching the diversity and vibrancy of the community and its offerings.

## Stakeholders

> - **Artists**: Primary beneficiaries of the proposed change, particularly those who found the current deposit requirements prohibitive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **NFT Creators**: Primary beneficiaries of the proposed change, particularly those who found the current deposit requirements prohibitive.
```

> - **KodaDot**: As the facilitator of artists' relations, KodaDot has a vested interest in making the platform more accessible.

Reviewer 3: KodaDot may be an example, but I don't think RFCs should target specific entities.
```suggestion
- **NFT Platforms**: As the facilitator of artists' relations, KodaDot has a vested interest in making the platform more accessible.
```

> - **Polkadot Community**: Stands to benefit from an influx of artists, creators and diverse NFT collections, enhancing the overall ecosystem.

Reviewer: I think the community is also interested in the security of the network.

Author: Hmm, since this is talking more about the benefits for Stakeholders, would it be okay if I better highlight this point in the drawbacks?

Reviewer: But the Polkadot Community also benefits from a secure network. Otherwise if the state gets bloated like on Moonbeam then it is not good.

Previous discussions have been held within the KodaDot community, as well as with artists expressing their concerns about the deposit amounts. Referencing to [Polkadot Forum conversation](https://forum.polkadot.network/t/polkadot-assethub-high-nft-collection-deposit/4262).

## Explanation
This RFC suggests modifying the smart contract governing collection creation on the Polkadot Asset Hub to require a lower deposit. The exact amount of the reduced deposit is yet to be determined and should be discussed and agreed upon by the stakeholders. The implementation of this change requires careful consideration of the network's integrity and the prevention of spam, possibly through alternative means such as rate limiting or account verification.

> **Prices and Proposed Prices on Polkadot Asset Hub:**

Reviewer 3: The explanation lacks discussion that [I was hoping for](https://forum.polkadot.network/t/polkadot-assethub-high-nft-collection-deposit/4262/17?u=joepetrowski) about the tradeoffs and how you arrived at these suggested deposits.

_Scroll right_
```
| **Name**                  | **Current price implementation** | **Price if DOT = 5$**  | **Price if DOT goes to 50$**  | **Proposed Price in DOT** | **Proposed Price if DOT = 5$**   | **Proposed Price if DOT goes to 50$**|
|---------------------------|----------------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------------|---------------------------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------------|
| collectionDeposit         | 10 DOT                           | 50 $                   | 500 $                         | 0.1 DOT                   | 0.5 $                            | 5$                                   |
| itemDeposit               | 0.01 DOT                         | 0.05 $                 | 0.5 $                         | 0.001 DOT                 | 0.005 $                          | 0.05$                                |
| metadataDepositBase       | 0.20129 DOT                      | 1.00645 $              | 10.0645 $                     | 0.0020129 DOT             | 0.0100645 $                      | 0.100645$                            |

> | attributeDepositBase      | 0.2 DOT                          | 1 $                    | 10 $                          | 0.002 DOT                 | 0.01 $                           | 0.1$                                 |

Reviewer: It would be nice to see these values in relation to what is actually being stored on-chain.  
Then we can compare these values to proven spam-resistant storage prices (like in the preimage pallet).  
It should be possible to calculate the DOT/Byte to make it comparable.  

Otherwise they are just as random as at genesis, now just 1/10 😉

>  -> rphmeier

> Technical: We want to prevent state bloat, therefore using state should have a cost associated with it.
>  -> joepetrowski

## Testing, Security, and Privacy

## Performance, Ergonomics, and Compatibility

### Performance
This change is not expected to have a significant impact on the overall performance of the Polkadot Asset Hub. However, it is crucial to monitor the network closely, especially in the initial stages after implementation, to identify and mitigate any potential issues.
 
Additionally, a supplementary proposal aims to augment the network's adaptability:

> Just from a technical perspective; I think the best we can do is to use a weak governance origin that is controlled by some consortium (ie. System Collective).
> This origin could then update the NFT deposits any time the market conditions warrant it - obviously while honoring the storage deposit requirements.
> To implement this, we need RFC#12 and the Parameters pallet from @xlc.
>  -> OliverTY

> This dynamic governance approach would facilitate a responsive and agile economic model for deposit management, ensuring that the network remains both accessible and robust in the face of market volatility.

Reviewer 3: I don't really agree with this approach for a few reasons. One, in attempting to provide stability it actually removes it because the DOT-based deposit can change so often that NFT issuers don't even know how much DOT they should acquire in order to plan a few weeks in advance.

Two, it does not scale. There are deposits all over the system. This group could then find themselves perpetually changing tons of deposits.

I don't see any need to update deposits more than every six months, which is well within the realm of runtime upgrades. If deposits should be tied to some fiat value, then on Asset Hub they should just directly declare the deposit in a chosen stablecoin. If the deposits are in DOT, and users want to hold stablecoins, then wallets can easily batch an Asset Conversion swap in front of a creation call.

### Ergonomics
The proposed change aims to enhance the user experience for artists, making Polkadot more accessible and user-friendly.

### Compatibility
The change doesn't impact compatibility.

## Unresolved Questions
- Determining the optimal new deposit amount that reduces the barrier to entry while preventing state bloat remains a subject for debate. What is the balance that allows for inclusivity without compromising the network's efficiency and security?

> ## Future Directions and Related Material

Reviewer: I think a good future direction would be to establish some kind of process on how to agree on these values.  
Otherwise we will have the same discussion every 3-6 months i guess.

Author: The proposed prices have been adjusted so that they are not too low, but still have a reasonable maximum at a historical maximum of prices of DOT and KSM.
